Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. Thank you, everybody, for listening, and thank you all for listening to the last half a million listens. We are celebrating.
over 500,000 podcast listens now for only a little over 100 episodes, which I think is a pretty good accomplishment. So thanks, everybody, for listening. Thank you all for subscribing. And if you're new here, this is your first episode. We're assuming most of you are returning listeners. It'd be great if you could subscribe to the podcast. And if you've already done that, sharing the podcast goes a long way to helping us grow. We really appreciate that. Nice rating wherever you listen to podcasts. And, of course, we are ad-free, so if you would like...
To donate to the show, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. Thank you, everybody, for having donated over the last, how many years now? Four? Three? Four? Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It was four years, and the third week in March, like March 20th-ish, 2019 is when we started. Yeah. Wow. Okay, cool.
And let's see what else we got. We got no show notes up on the website, because we are roasting some of my old training schedules today. And I'm not going to post them, because I don't want anybody getting any harebrained ideas to try them, because they're not that good. But yeah, if you've got any coaching consultation inquiries...
Thankfully, we have got better coaching since then. Empiricalcycling at gmail.com, of course, if you'd like to work with us, reach out and we'll chat. We've got a bunch of coaches and we're probably adding another coach soon because everybody has been reaching out for inquiries and we thank you so much. That's why this podcast is here. That's why we are growing and that's why we've been doing okay for the last four years. So thanks, everybody. If you'd like to consult with us, of course.
You can do that too. Ask any questions. Our time is your time. We can look at your files. We can plan your season. We can go over things that went well or not so well. Usually it's not so well. And hopefully we get some good recommendations going forward. So we've also got some listener questions from my Instagram, Empirical Cycling. And if you'd like to ask a question for future podcast episodes, go follow me at Empirical Cycling on Instagram. And we'll do some memes up there in the regular feed and some other stuff.
Of course, we've got some AMAs up in the weekends in the stories. And I will say, of course, one more time for everybody who counts how many times that I have this verbal tick. So thanks, everybody. So what do we got? Man, a half million lessons. Yeah, I mean, it's funny because I feel like when you think about things that you do in your life, like what else do you do that gets up close to sort of in the millions, right? It's like, okay, if you're a cyclist, pedal strokes.
You know, steps that you take walking. Heartbeats. Heartbeats. Lengths. Shifts. Shifts. Yeah, breaths. I was a swimmer for a long time, so like swimming, you know, strokes or whatever, but yeah, like, I feel like a few things in your life you actually encounter, I guess for some of you lucky few, you might encounter dollars in these sort of quantities, but for the mere mortals among us, not unless it's like the amount owed.
I will hopefully have Ferraris in the millions. Yeah, exactly. Rolexes numbering the millions. I hope everybody didn't mind the last episode, which was the April Fool's episode. I got quite a few messages about, oh my god, I had a heart attack, that everything was all changing and it was for the worse. So sorry, everybody, about that. But we also got a lot of good feedback that it was funny or funny enough or at least entertaining.
And I feel like the good, I don't like a lot of the April Fool's things that come out, but I feel like the ones that are good are the ones that like, at least have you going for at least the short beginning, you know, if it's like an article or something like that that you read, and you're like, oh, is this real? Like, the headline seems somewhat believable, and you read it, you know, a third of the way into it, and then you're like, oh, okay, ha ha ha, you know? Yeah, yeah, and I think our listeners
know us at this point well enough that we did an April Fool's episode last year, and the joke was that I was going to ask you physics questions that was supposed to lead to how to improve your cycling, and we never got there. Right, yeah. And people said they enjoyed the conversation anyway, because you're good at talking about physics, and I'm good at asking really dumb questions about physics, because I just learned it enough to ask exactly the dumbest questions that you can go, well, it's not quite like that.
I think that it's fun to actually show people just how ignorant I am at so many things that are not related to cycling training. Everybody who seems to tell me that I'm somehow smart, I'm like, I don't know about that. I've worked pretty hard at this one little thing. Yeah. And I still feel like I'm always...
Got a lot more work to do, honestly. Oh, totally. And I think that's how it goes with someone who's an expert in anything. Just because they're an expert in one thing does not mean they're an expert in everything. And that's one of those things that always drives me nuts when you watch, I don't know, TV or movies or whatever. They have some scientists and the scientist also has, you know, six other PhDs and all these other things, right? Yeah. Like Bruce Banner is supposed to have like seven PhDs. And I remember looking this up like,
Three or four of which, you know, overlap with other fields of, like, engineering and physics. Like, you would not get a separate PhD in, like, nuclear physics and then also, you know, biophysics, whatever the fuck he's supposed to have. Like, come on, man, you know. So, yeah, I think it's certainly a compliment when people think that you're like, oh, hey, this person's really good at this one thing. They must be good at all these other things, too. And you're like, like you said, no, no, no. You spend...
I know people refute it now, but there's that whole, you know, sort of 10,000 hours thing. Like, yeah, you don't do 10,000 hours in 10 things, right? And 10,000 hours isn't even a lot. It's like, what, four or five years, like, as a 40 hours a week job? Yeah. And I would think that...
If you do 50 weeks, 40 hours a week, you're like 2,000 hours a year. So that's like five years as your full-time job. Actually, and one of the things that I actually looked at, because I think as a coach, one of the things that we've kind of talked about in previous episodes before is that I've had more experience coaching people through a full season. And so what I did was I looked at kind of my average client load, about how many seasons I've...
Train People Through. And the answer is, you know, my average client load is like 20 to 25, sometimes a little more, but I like to keep it around 25. And so I've been coaching since like early, like I did free training plans like late 2014. And 2015 was when I started, I got like 50 bucks for a month. Actually, I think my first coaching payment was like 30 bucks.
for actual cash. Before that, somebody had given me a mug, which is a Jens Voigt Shut Up Legs mug, which is still on my desk to this day. Nice. It's holding all up. I think I remember that. I remember way back, yeah, because I started with you in 2016, and the 2015 beginning of 2016, yeah, it was like 50 bucks a month? Yeah. 75 bucks a month, something like that. I remember thinking as a graduate student on a pretty bad salary, it was, I could afford it.
You know, it was not But I was new, and that's, you know, it's not like I could That's how it goes, yeah Yeah, I couldn't like charge the big bucks or anything like that, but, and I also remember my friend Andrea, like, she was one of my very first clients, and she pushed me into like, no, you are going to be good at this, like, you just keep going with this, and put yourself out there, and I didn't like being the center of attention, I still don't like being the center of attention, that's why I like podcasts and like writing articles, because
I don't, you know, I don't feel like a thousand eyes looking at me, um, or a thousand ears, I guess, or thousands, millions at this point, um, half a million, uh, actually, if it's two ears, then it's a million, um, so, technically correct. The average person has slightly fewer than two ears. Yeah, but okay, so we're getting way off track. Um, so at this point, I have coached, uh,
probably about 175 seasons so far. And I like to think that that's given me some perspective. Because now when I look back at my old training plans, and by the way, I'm going to be cringing so hard through this episode. So everybody else who's enjoying listening to this, just know I'm not.
Enjoying going over this, because it's one of those things where, like, you remember looking back in your life into those moments where you kind of cringe and go, oh, god, I did that, or, oh, I said that, ugh. And it runs through your head every once in a while, and then you're like, I gotta never do that again. Some of these training plans. Right, right, as you're falling asleep at night, yeah. Yeah, some of these training plans, because this was back also, because I got WKO 4 in, like, September of 2015 or something like that.
and so I was just starting to really work with data at that level and all I really had was my experience of being coached by a local coach and a lot of the training plans I had was kind of like the stuff that he had given me but in a way that I thought modified would be better because I was thinking more about training specificity because there were a bunch of stuff that
He told me that I believed for a long time until I went, oh wait, that's bullshit. Like one of the things that we're probably going to see here that I gave to somebody is that if you wanted to have a massive FTP, like I remember my friend Dan was like, hey, how come I can't just like do FTP training all year and then have like a 400 watt FTP? Because he started at like 300 and he went to like 330, 340, something like that. He was like, I want 400.
And our coach was the same guy. He said, well, you could do that all winter if you wanted to, to get 400 watts, but you need so much other stuff in bike racing. And me and Dan were like, yeah, but having 400 watts, you could ride away from so many people. Why would you need anything else? Especially at the Cat 3 level? Oh, my God. And so I believed that for a while until I tried it and I saw that it didn't work.
And that was in like, you know, 20, like fall of 2015, or 16 or something like that. And, and, and I was like, Oh, well, that's not right. So why don't we start taking a look? And, because I shared it with you. And so why don't we go through like, the fall of 2015 to start, because this was one of my clients' cyclocross seasons.
Cyclocross, everyone's favorite. Yeah, I had done a fair bit of cyclocross racing, and I was like, all right, so I know kind of what it takes. And actually, this is one of my coach's other philosophies going towards this was cyclocross is a bunch of sprints. And like back in the day, I had always had a naturally good sprint. And so he was like, you're going to be great at cyclocross. It's all sprints, and you've got a good one. And so I'm like, yay, I'm going to be good at cyclocross. And I sucked at cyclocross. Yeah.
Because it turns out I had no aerobic capacity. And that was a lesson that I learned early on, but what still was trying to apply here. So like, let's look at the week of like 11-1, like the 1st of November. So it's like, you know, Sunday endurance ride.
Five hours, and some tempo each hour, so I still do that kind of stuff for people now, that kind of ride, but it's like the structure of the weeks and some of the specific stuff is so misplaced and bad. Tuesday was a gym day with a short spin. Wednesday was openers.
Thursday was a 20-minute test. I was still doing 20-minute tests at this point. It was only going to be the next spring where I started giving people the longer tests. Friday was an easy ride. And then Saturday was negative split endurance. And so I was like, here's the workout. Do the first half of five to six hours in low zone two. I was still doing zone stuff then. Then stop and have a muffin.
or some other moist pastry, maybe a soda. On the way home, hammer high zone two the whole time. And don't forget to eat while riding. It's easy to bonk early on this ride. I don't think I would give anybody that kind of ride at this point. Because, I mean, this was coming from more is more.
And a lot of the endurance rides that I had given people were the ones I was doing myself, where I was like, start easy, and then just at the end, I was just hammering hell for leather, just hauling the mail on the way back. And I know now it's completely unnecessary, and it adds a lot of extra fatigue, but at the time, I had no idea. Yeah. I mean, and that's the sort of thing where it's one thing to...
If you start feeling a little bit good, like, try a little bit harder. It's another thing to, like, you know, yeah, peg it two watts below zone three on the way back. Yeah. Yeah, it's something that I've memed about ever since. So she actually went to Northampton.
that weekend, NoHo Cyclocross. Great race. Still highly recommend that race. Excellent organization. A lot of fun. Great courses. If you're ever up in New England and want to race cyclocross, I highly recommend that one. Yeah, that run-up slash ride-up sometimes. Yeah, the upper section and the lower section, it's always a lot of fun. I remember one year, it was me and some mountain biker, probably.
who, he would pass me in all the twisty stuff, and then I would rocket by him on all the flat stuff, and I remember at one point, I like rocketed by him, and it was like the last time I saw him in the race, as I go by him, he yells at me, fucking roadie! Yeah. Hey, sorry man, you run what you brung. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, Northampton has the fast sections, and then Gloucester also had the fast sections, you're like, thank God. Yeah. More than 10 meters to pedal.
Continuously, thank God. Okay, so let's go for the next week. We've got, let's see, did she race that weekend? She did not race that weekend, but it was like, it was still kind of like, kind of regular base training, but also kind of not. It's a little much looking back at it. So Tuesday was 2x20 minute zone 3. Wednesday was either cyclocross practice, I think.
and 5x20s steep hill at 60 RPM, like low cadence. I don't know why I put that there. I have literally no clue why I gave that workout. Is that like a... Yeah, just a bigger gear, cyclocross, torque, seated thing? Maybe? I told her like...
Get in the drops and focus on engaging your lower back and glutes and hammies. And then five sprints from a medium gear, like 5321, focus on spinning up and then doing five seated spin-ups, which are like big gear stuff. So I guess it was just like a big gear workout. I don't understand this workout. Yeah. Is it wasted energy? Wasted time. Like nowadays, if I were going to give a workout like that,
It would just be short, big gear stuff, maybe on a local cyclocross course. I would have probably said, go to Lars and hammer up the hill in gear that's a little too big, maybe 6x30 seconds or something like that, long rests, and that would be it. That's a totally sufficient workout. There's nothing else you need to do, and if you really want to make it cyclocross specific, you start at the bottom of that hill, and then you do a cyclocross start for like...
20 to 50 meters to get up to speed, and then you hit the hill, and now you're done. You don't need anything else. Oh, God, it's so overcomplicated. What was wrong with me? Let's see. What else? Oh, here's another good one. The next week, a Thursday workout, climb Summit Ave four times. It's about a two-minute hill. It's pretty steep. At 60 RPM at your FTP.
Nice. Yeah. I mean, this is, I remember when that was, this sort of thing was, you know, big gear, FTP work, force, something, something, something, you know. Yeah. That was, that was a thing. I remember that being a thing, being popular. Some people still do it. So. Oh, you know where I. It's not like these are coming from nowhere, I would say. You know where I got it from? The Cyclist Training Bible. Hold on, I got it right here. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's what, I definitely remember stuff like this from, from,
from Friel's book, where he does talk about in there that big gear work is not a substitute for gym work, just in terms of like force production, but he still does have big gear VO2 or threshold type stuff in there, if I remember correctly. Yeah, right, of course, here it is, F3, force workout, steep hills.
Same Hill, 3-5 minutes of recovery, be sure to warm up thoroughly, intensity may climb to zone 5B several times, with recoveries in zone 1, climb in and out of the saddle, maintain a cadence of 50-60 RPM, stop the workout if you cannot maintain at least 50 RPM, do this workout no more than twice a week, do not do this workout if you have knee problems, periods, build 1, build 2, peak race. And I remember being appalled at the lack of specificity of that workout, like...
How long are these hills? It could be 20 minutes. Could it be two minutes? I don't know. And I was left to fill in the blanks. And twice a week, does that mean can you do other workouts several other times a week? How hard can they be? How easy can they be? And I didn't have any context for this stuff. Actually, why don't we go to the other schedule we're going to look at?
His 2015 was for cyclocross stuff, and I way, way overdid it. I way overdid it, oh my god. Let's see, what's one of the most appalling weeks we have in here, besides all of them? Oh, here's a good one. Okay, so let's, starting with like 10-10, cross race.
on a Saturday, then Sunday, three hours with form sprints and 10 by one minute max cadence, so not that hard of a workout, easy spin Monday. Tuesday, one and a half hours, two by 30, zone three with a form sprint every five minutes during intervals. Not too bad, but nowadays I would assign somebody an easy ride.
Maybe two, three hours, some skills work instead. Wednesday, cyclocross practice, two by 20 minute hot laps, pretty typical cyclocross practice. Thursday, an hour of zone one and cross skills. Friday, openers. Why do you need openers? You don't need openers unless, like, I've got one client now where, like, I'll give him, on a week like this, I'll give him quote unquote openers, but the openers is like,
because he needs more sprints in his legs to feel good the next day, to like feel snappy and like he's got that connection. And he's currently my only client where that's necessary. And that's like an individual thing because at this time, that was the kind of stuff I was getting. And I hadn't seen that it didn't, it was just a lot of extra fatigue. Yeah, if you're a race, if it's a race you're just training through, like, eh? Yeah. Eh? Eh?
You know, it makes sense if it's a, it's a major goal race. Like you want to, you're taking it easy that week. You want to feel good, getting a little bit of intensity, but yeah, if you're just, it's a, not even a C race. It's just a regular season. Like you're just, you're racing a race. Like, yeah. Um, well, and here's, here's one of the most useful, uh, philosophical things I've ever heard on openers is that openers are a privilege for the well-rested.
That comes from Nat Ward. And that's one of the things that stuck in my head the longest that he's ever said, along with when he was talking about how bike racing is not a sport of winning, because I had just gotten dropped at a road race as usual. And he said, cycling is a sport about managing disappointment. And then I'm sitting there, I'm processing, he takes a pause, and then he goes,
And that's why the French love it. So thanks, Netward, for those gems. And so, okay, going back to this cross season, it's so bad. Okay, it gets, this is like one of the things where nowadays I would look at this in a consult and go, this is way too much. You've got to dial it back like 10 notches. So after that week, he does Friday, cross skills and openers, Saturday, Sunday, race, race.
Monday, an hour easy spin, because by the way, there's another thing my coach had told me, you've got to ride at the bike every day. Get used to being on the bike every day. Yeah. Yeah, I noticed that. There's like no- Yeah, there's no off days, no rest. No off days, yeah. Yeah. I mean, I guess an hour or like 45 minutes of just soft pedaling can kind of be, you know, but yeah. Yeah. Well, and here's the other thing. What is that getting you? I didn't have a mechanism really.
to check. Because this was all in Google Sheets. And at one point I was like, all right, can you put your fit files from your computer into like a Google Drive that I can download? And I would do that like every week or two or something like that. But I didn't really have any like short loop where I could like see that the ride was too hard and say, you got to go easier next time, which I do now.
Um, that's, and we'll get into, you know, a lot of the stuff that's changed since all this stuff. And cause that's, I, I figure a lot of people would be wanting to know, so what's different now? Um, yeah, we'll get into that. But, um, and also Kyle, notice how, where I've got, um, a column for, uh, my client's comments and there are none. So I had no idea what was going on. It was like, like fog of war. I was just kind of guessing.
It's like playing Battleship. Not the most ideal feedback loop. No, far from ideal. I mean, that's why nowadays in coaching, I don't have any contact levels and I refuse to let anybody have to pay for access or need to pay for access because as a coach, I don't want to do a bad job. B7. Miss.
hit. So I don't think people should have to pay for me to have access to information that I want, which is people's feedback. And so nowadays, I would be like, dude, comment on your fucking rides. I am flying blind here, and this is no good. Okay, so anyway, so after two cross races that weekend, Monday Easy Spin, Tuesday, whoo!
3x10 minutes, 30-30-30-30s. And this was a drill that was 30-second sprint on the bike, 30-second rest, dismount and shoulder your bike during this rest, then sprint for 30 seconds up a long run-up, and then remount, and then spin 30 seconds. Not the clearest language in that drill, either.
I mean, that sounds very race-specific. I see where you're going with that. Yeah, it just wasn't well executed. It's like, it's like just long enough to get really tired and to like get the race-specific-ness in, but the next day he's got cross-practice. Why? Wasn't that just cross-practice? I know. And then...
Because I think one of the things I was thinking was, because when I went to cross practice on Wednesday mornings at, you know, ass o'clock in the morning, it was like, it was so technical for me, I couldn't ever really push that hard. Like, I was more focused on negotiating the tour, because there was a lot, it was like on a hillside, basically, at Lars Anderson Park, and I was always like, like,
Is my tire pressure too high, too low? I was getting a lot of grass between my tire and my rim. I was running tubes. And I just couldn't push that hard. I could get a good start. But after that, I just died. And so I didn't know what those cross practices were like. And I figured they were kind of like mine. They probably weren't. And so I was like, all right, well, you've got to get some specific
Work in, because this is, because I didn't realize that the intensity was basically equivalent, and that if you're doing one of these workouts, you might as well be doing the other. Yeah, I mean, it's interesting because there you have Tuesday, those 30-30-30-30s, and then you have cross practice, and then Thursday is skills slash zone one, and then you have openers, and you're like, well.
You just did these two things back-to-back. You could have put the soft skills in between at least. And not doubled up on the intensity two days in a row like that. Yeah. And openers, usually I was advising people to do some pretty hard stuff, like a couple starts, a couple sprints. It was basically looking like five minutes of cross practice, like times two or three or something. So it was just a lot of super high intensity that week.
One of the things I realized later is that it was just too much, too much intensity. And because as soon as I started to train myself and I only started to do a couple hard days a week, I was like, oh, this is so much better. I can actually hit all this stuff harder and I'm actually seeing improvements. This is crazy. And then, of course, so this guy, he does Saturday, Sunday, more cross racing. And then he gets a rest week and then he does two more cross races.
And of course, after the rest week, guess what he doesn't do on Friday before his two cross races? He doesn't do openers! It's totally backwards! Oh my god, I am cringing at myself so hard, I'm sorry. And then he has two weeks off. And then he gets Thursday, Zone 1, Friday, two hours of Zone 2, Saturday, openers, Sunday!
Five-Minute Test and a 20-Minute Test in the same day, because I was that basic bitch. I mean, that's in the prescription of the 20-minute FTP test, is to do the five-minute blowout. Yeah. So, you're just following what the Bible says. Yeah, that's true. And, of course, I had read Training and Racing with a Power Meter, so I was big-braining the shit out of this stuff, too.
I don't know. It's like, what do you see here that I'm doing wrong? If you were going to consult with somebody doing all this stuff and say, how would you improve this? What would you do? I mean, I think you hit on one of it. It's just some of these weeks, it's a lot of intensity. It's like, especially because a lot of these are
And it's understandable for cross, it's a lot of stochastic, hard efforts, and then more stochastic, hard efforts, like two or three times a week, right? And you're like, well, that's kind of a lot. You think, oh, 30 seconds, but it's not like it's 30 seconds zone four, it's 30 seconds, you know, hard. And so, to have that, you're like, oh, maybe...
You know, if you're going to do cyclocross hot laps on the weeks that, you know, you want to do some cyclocross practice hot laps, things like that, like, cut back on this, uh, the other, like, very stochastic-y, you know, race simulation type work, and, you know, you don't have a ton of, are any of these, there are, like, no VO2 max workouts.
or not a ton I can see. I guess some of these stochastic ones probably are by the end. Well, if you're able to go hard enough and that's one of the issues here also is I wasn't thinking in terms of what part of physiology are we targeting here? It was just like it was not seeing the forest for the trees and thinking too race specific because
I remember another person I was training at this time, I was thinking, I was like, okay, well, we got to get some one-minute efforts, but they're different than two-minute efforts, and they're different than starts, and they're different than 30-30s, and I was just piling all this shit on, and the one-minute power was going up, and the sprint power was okay-ish, but the race results weren't there. They were fine, but they weren't improving like I was hoping they would, and that was the beginning.
of the feedback loop of what's going wrong here. Like, that was the first time I had ever really considered I'm not getting out what I think I'm putting in. Yeah. I mean, the things I like, I do appreciate that you do actually have people do Zone 2 long rides, even though it's cyclocross, quote-unquote cyclocross season. They do have, like, longer aerobic rides when you can squeeze them in, and you are having people do tempo or...
Sweet Spot work here and there, you know, as it kind of, as it makes sense. But yeah, it's just a ton of like stochastic, you know, oh, and now you're going to do, you know, the 30-30-30-30s or cyclocross skills and things like that. So just, you know, there are good things to pick out. Like obviously, you know, skipping threshold work for like all of cross race season would be a terrible idea. Well, I know that now. And I remember,
I remember, I think I had posted in the WKO Facebook users group or something like that. I think it was there. Maybe it was somewhere else. But I remember, you know, saying something about like, oh, it was like, I don't remember exactly what was happening. But like, I was thinking like, okay, somebody's FTP is like going down. And that's bad. Like for cyclocross season. I remember somebody saying like, oh, yeah, in cross season, like there's like.
doing all the cross stuff isn't enough to maintain FTP. And nowadays, I know that that's not strictly true, because the answer from him, I think, was do more FTP work, like steady state. But that's also a little bit forest for the trees, too, because nowadays, I know that long rides, and typically, if you're doing enough riding, one of the things that...
kind of stunts FTP work itself is just fatigue. Right, yeah, I was going to say, like, it's hard to do, it's hard to nail a sweet spot workout when you just did 30-30s the day before. Yeah, and then cross-practice and a long ride and racing, and nowadays I see stuff like that and I'm like, all right, well, I'll tell people to, like, sag cross-practice, use it for skills work.
Like if, especially if it's tired, but they kind of need something, a little something, so. It's funny you say that because I feel like when I, and I didn't, you weren't coaching me whenever I did, whenever I've done cyclocross, but when I did cross practice, it was definitely, I wasn't sagging it, but it was definitely more, I always treated it more like skills work and like, yeah, like try hard on some steep sections, but you know, like you're coasting the downhills, you're not.
You're not trying to rail every run-up and stuff like that. I remember doing that just as sort of like an auto-regulation thing of like, well, I can't possibly hammer this whole time. Yeah. Well, and one of the things that I like about some of my European people that I coach is that when they have cross-practice, it's not like a race a lot of the time. Because when we did cross-practice, it's just a race. It's like another race.
When they do cross-practice, there's actual guided skills work, like weekly. Ah, okay, yeah. And I'm like, oh my god, they're actually practicing in cross-practice. Like, who would have thought? It's such a good idea. But, well, so nowadays, like, what am I, how would I do this differently? So, I would, if somebody's racing on a weekend, I'm gonna give them, like, skills work during the week, but I'm gonna tell them to go easy.
and if they need if like it's like the one guy that I'm working with who needs a couple sprints like I'll give him some sprints on like Wednesday and like Friday just because he doesn't have that snap otherwise but everybody else usually needs some more rest and I'll try to hit like a sweet spot workout during the week and I don't usually give a time frame directly like I'll give one
by question mark, or I'll give like two by 20, maybe if somebody's better at FTP work when they're a little tired, I'll give them like two by 15, option for a third interval, but it's like just enough to like get your legs feeling good doing that, but then you stop, and then you rest. Imagine that, yeah. Yeah. Stopping when you're feeling good, not like burying it every workout. Yeah. Although I certainly understand
the mentality of wanting to do that. I mean, that's like one of those appealing things I think about CrossFit actually is the like, oh, you like work really hard, you know, and it does feel good. But if you're just working out to work out, that's one thing. But if you're working out with a long-term goal, it's a different strategy. Well, and I've done a number of consults with people who have that kind of mentality of like, I just want to get the work in. Like, I remember when I first ever.
was a guy who was going 100% every single ride. And his comments were like, yeah, I just got the workout in and I felt like I had a good workout and I was kind of tired, but I'm glad I got it done. And I'm like, it's like, you're not seeing any improvements. And he was looking for improvements. And I was like, you got to dial this back. You got to dial it way, way, way back. And I don't know if he ever did or not, but I hope he did.
Cannot start every workout at an 11. Yeah, for real. Well, why don't we move on to road season? So let's go to 2016 in our first rider. Okay. And she was doing, she was racing collegiate. So racing for her was starting in like mid-March. Scrolling down, let's see. Probably.
Yeah, probably, let's see, that would have been... Late March. Yeah, like, late March. Oh, yeah, NYC, yeah, late March. Last few years of the... Philly Flyer. Flyer, and, yeah. R.I.P. May it rest in peace. And Packers, wait, what city are the Packers in? No. It's Green Bay. Packers or Green Bay. Is Green Bay in Philly? No. Oh, I don't know anything. I don't know. Green Bay's in Wisconsin.
You're going to get a lot of emails about this one. My first guess was, I was going to guess Michigan. The Philly thing was a joke, but I was actually thinking it was Michigan. So I'm so sorry. I don't watch football. It's football, right? All right. Yes. Yeah. All right. See, told you I'm not that smart. Okay. So get it back to me not being smart. Boy, boy, howdy. Okay. So let's just start with the first week. So the week of the 4th of January.
Monday, an hour of Zone 1, because why would you take a day off the bike? And, you know, one of the things here is that I think I was doing well at the time was I was asking somebody for their available time. Like, I knew that I couldn't just, like, write a blanket plan if I'm individually coaching somebody and just have it work for them, because if somebody's got two hours and I get them five...
And like they've got like a total of like two hours worth of tempo work. Like what do they do? Like warm up and then do an hour, you know, an hour 40 of tempo and then call it quits? Like what do you do? So I think that that was good. Here's the bad. Tuesday. Oh God, I cannot believe I gave this to somebody in January. Fucking January. Tuesday, hour and a half, eight by 90 seconds up Summit Ave.
Steep Short Hill in Boston. Which is steep hill in Boston, yeah, for people who are not familiar. Yeah, I didn't assign rest intervals, I just said 8x90 seconds. I also gave a gym day. Nice, yeah. That sounds terrible. So here's the gym description. Bring the weights down so you're doing 2x15s again, because we had built from low...
You know, higher kind of reps to lower reps, higher weight. So, and so to me, lower reps or lower weight and more reps was going to be better, but realistically, it's the same amount of fatigue. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So I continue. You're in maintenance mode through racing. Feel free to do three by 15 or two by 20.
That's two sets of 20 reps. As long as it's not fatiguing, and by that, I mean you don't notice any soreness when you ride. That does not mean it wasn't fatiguing, idiot. Yeah. Oh, God. It means it probably wasn't overreaching, but it does not mean it. Yeah, you're not getting any hypertrophy stimulus per se. Yeah. But I also think it's a different thing because you're like, if what you want to stay in contact with in the gym is like,
High Force Production, like quality lifting. Sets of 20 is not that. No, no, it's really not. It's really not. Nobody do this. We are roasting my old plants for a reason because this is not where to start. Yeah, that's like maintenance for like bodybuilder, like hypertrophy work. Yeah, like that's a deload day. Like I went in, I had an easy day this morning in the gym and I did three sets of 10 at like 40%.
My One Rep Max-ish? It's like... Yeah. And I was feeling soreness in my muscles. I was like, oh, I'm glad I'm going light today because this stuff hurts. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. For reference, if you want to stay in touch with high force...
You do the higher weights, and you just stop after a couple reps while you still feel good, right? You take a weight you could do for seven, and you do it for three, and you stop. Yeah. And one of the other things I've learned since then, because I was barely into weight training. I had done a little bit when I was doing martial arts in my late teens, early 20s.
I hadn't really done too much since then, and I was just thinking back to what I had done. And what I had done was not good. Right. Like, not good at all. Like, my squat form was really bad. My deadlift form back in the day was really bad. Like, and it was supposed to help with my board breaking, because I was a really good, like, high-power board breaker in martial arts. Like, I think my sidekick boards were like, I think I could do like eight? A little more? Damn. Yeah. And I remember...
Ah, never mind. I could regale people with tails, but they're boring. So anyway, so one of the things I know now about strength training is that if you take some time off from doing the specific movements, a lot of what you lose, especially if you're maintaining weight and maintaining your muscle mass, a lot of what you lose is not actual strength. You're losing your motor unit and your motor pattern connection with the movement.
Yes. Yeah, it's like a skill, right? It's any other skill, and if you take time off, that skill decays. Like, if you haven't swung a golf club in seven months, you're probably not going to be good at it the first time out. Yeah, like, if you haven't, like, solved an integral in a couple years, like, you're probably going to suck at it. Like, I just... We went two very different directions. Kyle, don't ask me to do any used substitutions right now, please.
So that's one of the things that happens. And one of the things that this client in particular, in this year and subsequent years, she really liked was staying in the gym because she didn't want to lose the strength. And this is something that I still talk about with people to this day. So I want to keep the strength up. And it's like, you can, but you don't need to a lot of the time. And a lot of the time when people stop doing the heavy, heavy strength training and we just...
Bring the hard stuff down to like a couple singles or doubles at like not even a big RPE, like maybe a seven, maybe explosively, a lot of the time not. If that's better maintenance than like going properly heavy and to like properly close to fatigue. Yeah. I mean, I think this is a sort of weird analogy, but you think about like if you watch like Olympic weightlifters.
What they'll do for a lot of times a few days out from competition, you know, like that's a big thing now because there are lots of video just like everyone else, Instagram, you can see people and, you know, they're not going for max one rep really grindy squats and they're also not doing high volume, you know, sets of 10 squats, they're doing like heavy doubles or triples, maybe a single, but heavy enough that it's heavy, but light enough that it still moves well and then they stop.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. You know? You're like, oh, great. Moving well, relatively high force, not enough fatigue, you know, not going to pile on fatigue with a set of 15 squats or something. Yeah, and your intention also determines a lot of how the force moves. Like, if you try to do it explosively, you're going to generate more force with a lighter weight than if you try to move a heavier weight, heavy-ish weight slowly. Depends on the force and the weight and blah, blah, blah. But, okay, so the worst part about why I gave this person a
Gym Workout on Tuesday, is that Wednesday was also not easy, and neither was Thursday or Saturday or Sunday. I'm so sorry to this person. Hashtag, there are no easy days. Well, the funny thing was, she was improving through this, so I was like, oh my god, I guess I know what I'm doing. I did not know what I was doing. I was dealing with a person who was extremely gifted and talented. Yeah, for sure.
So, Wednesday was an hour and a half, high zone two, ugh, why? High zone two, with a hard 10 second acceleration every 10 minutes. So, I will say the good part is, after you do a hard, you know, anaerobic capacity slash VO2 max type 8x90 seconds and or a gym day, a zone two ride is not the worst thing in the world the day after. However, what I was trying to do, I think,
was I was like, I think I was trying to get too fancy in terms of like, oh, well, if we can get a little extra work done here, we should do a little extra work. Instead of just doing an easy endurance ride, which is what I should have put down there, or maybe like a tempo ride or something, but...
I was like, all right, so okay, we'll do high zone two, because it's a shorter ride, so we want more power, because you can do more power, and then we'll also sprinkle in some quote-unquote easy accelerations. Side note, if you're getting into your big motor units, like Tuesday, hard efforts up a steep hill, and then doing some gym work, and then Wednesday,
You are doing accelerations. And then Thursday, 2x30 minutes of 3 minutes of Zone 3 slash 2 minutes of Zone 4 standing at 60 RPM. Totally unnecessary. Like another big motor unit thing. Friday, an hour of Zone 1. Saturday, 3x16 Zone 4. Sunday, 4x5 minutes or 5x4 minutes of Zone 5.
Up a Hill with 5-8 minute rests, and then 30-40 minutes of Zone 3, which is a workout I'm pretty sure I had pulled from the back of training and racing with a power meter. Yeah. I mean, to be fair, I, you know, in a vacuum, not the worst workout in the world. But I do wonder, too, like, it seemed, you know, Saturday and Sunday, lots of time available.
But you're not – you're not – you would think that's when you stitch together two opportunities to do longer rides-based training. It's January. Well, she only had three hours, so I gave her three-hour workouts. And I think I was trying to big-brain this. Like, okay, we've got less time, so we're going to raise the intensity. Like, that's not a good –
approach, especially because now she's got five days of hard work a week, and the next week is not much better. Next week, Monday, an hour of Zone 1. Tuesday, 8x90 seconds, same workout as last Tuesday, with Jim. Wednesday, 3x17 minutes, Zone 4. Oh, God, that sounds terrible. Thursday, Zone 2, with a 12-15 second all-out sprint. Why do I do this every 10 minutes? Oh.
Oh God, I'm so sorry. If I had really read this program before this podcast, I would have said, let's not do this. Oh God. Okay, so I feel like again, if people are thinking like, okay, yeah, I've done that where I've done like a bunch of hard, harder intensity days in a row, like during the week, we understand, you know, if you're time limited, you feel like you have to crank up the intensity, but that hasn't, you don't, you don't have to do that every, you can't.
You can't possibly sustain doing that every day of the week, right? Like, if Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, you only have an hour and a half, so you think, like, well, gotta cram in just a ton of intensity. Like, nothing wrong with making one of those things an hour and a half of zone two, you know? Like, doing 90 seconds, like, a zone four workout, sure.
And then, like, you do have the Zone 2 in there, but you added the intensity, and then also you put it after the 2, you know, I kind of see what you're doing. You're trying to do Tuesday, Wednesday, build up the fatigue, Thursday, and Friday, come down from the fatigue a little bit before two more hard workouts Saturday and Sunday. Okay, that's fine. That makes sense, you know, generally speaking. The workout choice, yeah, okay. You can change it.
God, if you can see my face right now. Also, also the Monday, you know, yeah, no days off. So Monday, even though it could have just been off after back-to-back hard days, Saturday and Sunday, could have just been sit there on the couch, hour of zone one plus some core. Well, and here's the thing is, at this point also, like there was enough popular support for Junk Miles just being like spinning.
I think Long Slow Distance had kind of fallen out of favor for this type of training, at least in the people that I knew, because there wasn't that much training media or anything at the time. A lot of it was articles and forums. I remember seeing somebody big-braining the, oh yeah, this is what you can do for five minutes, and you want this to be your FTP. You just do it for five minutes, and then you hold it for longer, then you hold it for longer, and pretty soon you can hold it for an hour, and it's your FTP.
See, I make that joke about turning my 30-second power into my minute-long power. I'll do 1,200 watts for a minute. I can do 1,200 watts for like 30 seconds and 31 seconds, 32 seconds. Soon, sub-minute kilo. Let's ask Chris away how he did it. Yeah.
Start on third base for Chris Hoy, Jesus. Yeah, and so, okay, so the schedule, it continues the same way, like, or near the same way, for three fucking weeks. Three weeks. Yeah. The same, same Tuesday, what, like, the next, like, the third week Wednesday was 40 minutes of zone three with a 10-second acceleration every five minutes, because, you know, progressive overload.
That's a good idea at this point. And like the second week Saturday was a workout that I had gotten that I actually kind of liked, which was 20 minutes of zone three, 10 minutes zone four, five minutes zone five. And like that's exactly how I had gotten my workouts too, like written. And I mean, now I write.
I don't have like proof-it-in workouts, I just, I'll write like, okay, do, like if it were, if this were me now, giving somebody this workout, it would be like, all right, this is your power target, this is your power target, and then for this last, the last one, which is over threshold, like, you know, send it to like an eight to a nine out of ten, but then recover, blah, blah, blah, and I would be a lot more detailed, because this was very just much in a vacuum, it was like two of those long,
like 30-ish minute efforts with no context around them. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I recognize, I certainly recognize the writing style. And I think, you know, at least, what I noticed too is at least you do, there is like a rest week in here, but it's because of exams, which is like,
Also not a rest week at the same time, right? Yeah, I didn't at the time realize, because, you know, grad student here, and I didn't realize just how much stress there was. Like, yeah, because I, I don't, if I'm, if I'm recalling correctly, I think that round of exams went okay, but there was a round like the next year or the year after that that went very badly.
And it was like, all right, I need, and she said, I need easier training, I need less time on the training, and I drastically changed my approach at that point, but it was, you know, and I was thankfully in a position to have that flexibility, but a lot of the time back in those days, I, a lot of people would say, I need to do X, Y, Z time, like I only have an hour to train, and I, a lot of the times, I didn't know even what to give them for just an hour workout.
that was like on the trainer or in the morning. I see a lot of hour zone one, hour zone one, you know, half hour zone one, two hour zone two. So, all right, can we please stop looking at these schedules? Let's move on. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No worries. I know, I mean, you know, and things I remember, I remember from back then, like, I started working with you, like, formally with,
Yeah, that 2016, the same time, 2016 Collegiate Road season, which is my last year of racing road, Collegiate Road, and then back into, immediately into Elite Track Nats, and I conveniently crashed and broke my collarbone in there. Yeah, a lot of these things look similar. Like, I also, I took a look back before we did this, and I certainly understand because it was like race season, you're thinking like, oh, like a lot of race-specific things, and I was going into doing the
Kilo and the Pursuit at Elite Track Nats in 2016 in T-Town that year. And, like, the weeks leading up to it, it's like, you know, there's some FTP work in there, which is good, because you're still, like, very aerobic for the pursuit, right? But, like, the rest of it is all just, like, kilo-specific stuff, like, a lot of, like, you know, VO2 mag-specific stuff. And you're like, oh, wow, that week looks hard.
And I, I mean, I, I did well, I didn't know, like, but like, you know, you say the same thing, like, you know, like, oh, like this, you know, Rider 1 was, was improving. Um, I mean, I did, I feel like I did pretty well that, you know, I did not have any, any complaints at the time, you know, I was like, yeah, I, I did pretty well. I, I wrote a 111, you know, I said, yeah, 111 in a kilo. I think you set your best ever five minute.
in that, or for like four minutes in that pursuit at like 430 watts or something. Yeah, yeah, yeah, and I was like a 510, 509 or something in the pursuit, which is not great, but like I also had like no aerodynamics, very little practice in aero bars, like all that stuff, but I was like, it's actually not bad, like I did pretty well, like I think you're thinking like, oh man, you know, you were just running us into the ground, and maybe a little bit, and there's obviously some survivorship bias there from me and from, you know, these other riders too.
Because some of these riders I worked with until the end of their careers. Yeah. And I think that it's hard to, obviously it's hard to disentangle, right? Like improving year to year from your coaching improving, like as a skill, like how do you disentangle just the fact that if you work at something, like the whole history of work builds up and you will get better even with suboptimal conditions, you know, unless you really go.
really off the rails. Yeah, and so, you know, like, it was working, you know? To some degree. Yeah, like, I remember, like, later 2016, like, Rider 1 here, I went right for the, like, do all the Zone 4 stuff to...
You know, as my coach had said, like, just do your fall as like all zone four and you'll get, you know, 100 watts of FTP. And that was the first time where I had like, or another one of the first times where I remember distinctly having that eye-opening experience of, oh, this isn't getting better. Like, what I had been told is not true. And it was such an eye-opener for me to like, have that experience of, I think this should work.
I've told this should work. In my experience, I guess it should work. I kind of sucked aerobically. It didn't work for me. But I've got this rider who seems to just always be improving. So let's lean into the stuff that's helping the improvements. And it didn't work. And she was tired. Yeah. Go figure. Right? I mean, I feel like it's also hard when you have people who also want to race cross, right? They want to finish out a road season in August.
Take a month-ish easy and be like, cross-season, we're racing now. There's no time in there to actually reset and build back up. It's just, you're on all the time. Now, obviously, in hindsight, you realize you can't possibly be on all the time. And working with now professional athletes who do high-level criteriums and also cyclocross,
you know I tell them a lot of the time like you don't have enough time to like get in a good base season like we it's it's likely if you want to improve from where you are now it's going to be very difficult to do it's going to take some time in season and you're really going to have to sacrifice some of your form for your results or for you know being able to do your job for your team to some degree by like not being in shape for you know seasons in like March and April if
Because you're coming off cyclocross season, you're done, you know, at this point, maybe you go to Worlds, you're done at this point instead. And now you've got to be in shape in like a month and a half for crits? Yeah. It's a lot. And now I'm like, all right, well, like we, if you can have a, you can, you can look at long-term improvements, you can look at having a good road and
Crits season, and you can look at having a good cross season. Pick two. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. I mean, it's, you know, another example would be, like, why do pros not race all three Grand Tours? The recovery. Yeah. Yeah. Because, like, you can't recover from that. Like, not to mention, if you want to be fresh, and especially because Worlds comes later in the calendar for, like, for road cycling, like, you can't possibly do all of that and then...
rest up and then be in good shape for worlds either. Obviously, not everyone every year is contending for worlds, but just where things are spaced out, you just can't do it. No one can, right? Not even the most genetically gifted freaks can do it. Yeah. And even the tired ones, like when Wout does too much, his 80-90% is still better than almost everybody else's 100%.
Yeah, but it becomes beatable, right? You become much more beatable, where like, you know, you're, you're, would, you know, would you rather, you know, you're slogging through at like 80%? If you're, if you're an amateur, you're slogging through at 80%, like, it is supposed to be enjoyable, right? Like, just, just showing up is sometimes not enjoyable. Like, sometimes you do just need to show up and be like, all right, yes, this is fun, but.
If that's the only thing you ever do, like, ugh, rough. Yeah. It's so rough. Um, alright, so, alright, so let's think about some lessons. Uh, cause I jotted down a couple things that I, when I had a clear head and I was no longer cringing at my old plans, what do I do differently now? Um, so here's a couple of the bullet points. Uh, first, and this is, this is...
probably in order of the things that popped into my head that probably has some relation on, I don't know, I guess the recommendations I've given to people or other coaches or whatever. So checking workouts daily is a big one and getting people's feedback and commenting on people's workouts encourages them to comment back too because it says, hey, I'm here. I see what you're doing. I'm giving you recommendations that you can put into practice tomorrow.
instead of weekly or monthly or whatever. Because way back in the day, I was varyingly looking at people's schedules and seeing their comments day to day or not. There wasn't a lot of consistency with that stuff. And then I realized as soon as I started doing that, everybody's training and results got better. And I was like, oh, I got to keep doing this.
And then I was like, oh, I gotta get paid more to do this, because this is a lot of time. And when I can't check workouts, like if I'm like, if I've got a long drive, or if I'm at an event or something like that, like, it kills me to like, to like go to bed that night exhausted going, oh, I gotta check training peaks in the morning, I can't do it right now. Like, I hate that. And I tell people like, okay, I might not be able to check it every single night or every day.
If I've got nothing to do, I'll check it five times, ten times a day. I'll just be in there constantly. So that's the way I operate now as opposed to back then. It's like I'm much more invested and thankfully this is my full-time job and a lot of our coaches, this is their full-time job and they're very much the same way. So that's probably the biggest thing that's led to more improvements is like really being connected to people's day-to-day.
That makes sense. That makes sense. And I think especially, obviously, when you're coaching a team, like, hypothetically, like when I was in swimming, right, and you're in person every day, you don't necessarily need those comments because you can see it. Like, you know, in a swimming workout, you can see when someone starts to fall apart. You can see when they're, like, starting to dog stuff. But with cycling coaching, and a lot of people are not, you know, sitting there trackside doing workouts with their coach every day, it can be hard.
It can be hard to see that without riders actually telling you. Yeah. And one of the other things is that some people can juke the stats, as it were, to borrow from the wire. And they'll be like, wow, this workout sucked, but I'm going to put down a six RPE. Tough talk of an electronic spreadsheet. I don't want to show weakness or some macho bullshit. And it's like, yeah, this is not a hard workout. And then I look at the metrics. And this is another thing I do so much better now.
is I recognize signs of fatigue. And a lot of the time, over the course of a week or something like that, if somebody's giving me the runaround in terms of pretending they're not tired, now it'll take me maybe a couple days, maybe a week, where I'm like, something's going really wrong. And nowadays, I'll say, we got to back off. Because back in the day, I would say, wow, you need more training.
Because I didn't know the difference. And that was something that Dean Golich mentioned once, and I've never forgot that either, is he said, you know, a lot of the time when we got something going wrong, I'll go for more rest instead of more training. Because a lot of the time, I think he said it's like nine times out of ten, he hasn't found any solutions in more training. And I think that can be one of those things too, where if you're the athlete in the moment, it's hard to see that.
That, like, oh, you know, we always joke, like, the American work ethic, like, just work harder, like, oh, no one cares, work harder. But, yeah, like, if you are putting in work, like, if, you know, it's not like your sense of RPE and exhaustion and tiredness and stuff like that is gonna be
An order of magnitude off from, like, pros, right? Like, yes, there's a range, right? People fall within a range, and sure, but, like, you know, especially if you've been training for a while, you have a pretty good idea, like, when you're tired. Like, people are certainly good at ignoring it. Everyone's good at ignoring it for some time.
But yeah, just being realistic with yourself about like, dude, did I feel tired? Did that feel like shit? Like, did I just finish that like 2x20 and at the end be like, you know, it's 2x20, sweet spot, it should be completable on most days and was I like, you know. Head in the ground, like burying myself. Chewing on your stem, staring at your computer.
Standing Up, oh my god, like shifting gears, is the higher cadence easier? Is the lower cadence easier? What am I doing? Maybe I'll try a flat ground, maybe I'll try a hill. Oh, I'm dying. And stop, stop. I tell a lot of people now, like back in the day, I wouldn't have said, I probably would have said, oh, well, you got it done or something. Or like, oh, we'll try to make up this workout later. No, no, no, no, no. Don't make up the workout.
Maybe, but it's going to take the place of another workout, depending on how you're progressing. And a lot of the time, it's just, let's see how you're going, especially if you're sick or you're tired, life stress. Backing off and then reassessing and then starting from a new point and scrapping all of your expectations. I mean, sure, sometimes you've got to race and they're not going to change the date for you, sure. But when you have to reorient, you've got to start from...
a realistic spot of where am I now. Yeah. And that's not to say, like, sometimes people are able to be like, okay, if I, because of my schedule, I'm going to shuffle workouts around, you know, that's one thing, if you know that going in. It's another thing if you're like, oh, I feel terrible, I'm going to make an audible, you know, skip this workout, but then double up on Saturday or something. Oh, God, yeah. And the number of people, like, if I give somebody a double day,
Almost everybody who gets the double goes, can I do this in one workout? No. No, you cannot. You absolutely need to take a couple hours off the bike, get some food, take a nap, and then they go, wow, I didn't know I could do that. Yeah, I knew you could. So anyway, so one of the other things that I think is so different between now and back then is I understand the data a lot better.
and I know what I'm looking for now because enough things have consistently led me to better outcomes, like training outcomes, racing outcomes and a lot of it is just like what are we trying to improve and what metrics are we going to look at for improvements? Like if I'm looking at somebody's like for getting somebody ready to race and I'm looking at like one minute efforts or something like that, one of the things I'm going to look at over the however long we're doing these efforts is somebody's top end.
Is that absolute best one minute getting better? And what's the repeatability like? And what's the rest intervals like? Is it five-minute rest? Is it 10-minute rests? How good can they be over these rests? And can we shorten them and keep the quality high? Or do they fall off? What's going on here? And that's one of those things that you've got to think about. What is my metric for improvement? Because a lot of people that I see who I've consulted with,
like a lot of them if they've been listening to the podcast for a while I see a lot of really good things I like but some of them who haven't listened so long or like maybe didn't catch some of the older episodes or some things or you know miss some of the nuggets it'll be like or especially actually this is the bigger one is when somebody comes to me and they're working with a coach and things they don't feel like things are going well and they're like I need a second set of eyes that happens a lot so
When somebody needs a second set of eyes, I'll see, like, I'll see, like, 3x10 FTP, and, like, that's, like, the FTP workout. And it's just constantly the same workout. Or, like, VO2 max intervals at this power, something like that. It's like, well, are we seeing improvements? No. So, like, let's look at why not. And I think that having a feedback loop of knowing what I'm looking for, and, of course, I'm not, you know, I'm not.
Amazing at this. I'm not the best ever. I'm not like, you know, some beacon of whatever. Always learning. But that's another thing that I've done is, you know, faced or tried to, as best I can, faced with humility the fact that there's always something that I don't know and something that I'm going to learn. Yeah. Yeah, I like that. I mean, I think the biggest thing there too is like,
Just that problem-solving approach to this isn't working, why isn't it working, and not defaulting to it's not working because you're not working hard enough, or you're not working with a high enough volume or something, right? I think that's a big issue where if people, their knee-jerk reaction is, oh, well, it just must be, it must be that I'm not working hard enough, so I'm just gonna...
Double Down, as opposed to, like you said with Dean, where being like, well, turns out, in Dean's experience, most of the time, doubling down is not fixed. Yeah, and it's rare. Honestly, it's rare to get somebody who's not doing the work, and it happens. And, you know, these are people, I'm like, all right, let's, you know, give me a call. Let's talk about this. Let's talk about reasonable goals, and let's talk about your motivation, instead of just browbeating somebody into just writing more.
That's not my coaching style, really. I'm not like a... You know those football movies where they give the locker room halftime motivational speech and they go out there and they kick ass or whatever, or they come up with some ploy that seems like straight out of Homer or something like that? Some little stratagem to win the battle? That's not my kind of thing.
I'm an introvert, actually. I'm highly introverted, and human interactions take a lot of energy out of me. But actually, that's another thing that I've learned about myself, is that the human interactions have gotten better for me over time, and that's another skill that I've learned. Oh, absolutely, yeah. Yeah. I mean, so I didn't play a ton of football. I didn't play four years of high school football. Definitely the ethos.
of that, like, just, you know, oh, we're going to go out there, we're going to work really hard because we really want it, you know, and you're like, ah, but the coaching isn't good, you know, it's not going to fix bad coaching, like, like wanting it more. Oh, yeah, so I remember the analogy I was going to make now. So I think one of the things that happens a lot of the time with coaching is that when people aren't looking for the feedback,
and also not knowing how long to look for something to show improvements. Ah, yeah. That's a good one. Because a lot of the time, because I did a consult with somebody who was working with a coach and they had been, like, it started well for, like, six months or a year or something like that. Then it was, like, another year or maybe it was a year and a half or two even where they were doing pretty much the same training and I was like, so,
What's going on? He said, we're waiting for a breakthrough. I was like, I don't see you having a breakthrough because all of the metrics I see is you are actually overtraining now. Waiting for a breakthrough? Yeah. And sometimes, to be fair, sure, sometimes that happens. Like, you train really hard, you get a little bit of rest, whether you get injured or you get sick or it's deliberate, and then you come back from that and you go, wow, I'm really strong. Yeah, it happens.
But over the course of, you know, like over a year, it's, it's like I, you know, over the course of, because if you typically look at like, let's say you're looking to improve your FTP. If you are looking at typical timelines for how often should I retest my FTP, it's four to eight weeks. And so if you don't see any improvements in four weeks, maybe there's some fatigue, readjust in the next one. So you're looking at maybe like eight weeks, an eight week period.
Over which you should expect to see some improvements, either in FTP, like on an absolute scale, like the watts, or your TTE, like how long you can hold it. And if you are not seeing that, I mean, you know, a couple weeks, like four weeks, eight weeks is a long time to anybody. But at the same time, in the course of the large scheme of things, it's not that long.
Endurance Sport is that sometimes it can take that long to really see that something is starting to work or not. And going for like a year or two, doing the same thing and not seeing the improvements you want, like that is where you really like start to think, or I would start to think, okay, this is time wasted. Yeah, that's a while. Like everyone knows.
or not everyone, a lot of people know that endurance sports is delayed gratification, all that stuff, but two years? Oh, buddy, I feel so bad. Like, you know, even when I was swimming in college, and obviously the training was not optimized individually at that point, it was you're training teams of people and they're, you know, you can break them down by group and distance, you know, like distance of the races and then the strokes and those sorts of subgroups, but it's still,
Generally, everyone's kind of doing the same thing all at once. Like, even in that environment, you know, people would improve week to week, month to month, you know. You would, things would become, sets would become more accomplishable. You could do more. You could do things faster, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Like, sure, there were times you're training through and you're racist and you're tired and you're not going to throw up good times, but you knew that, like,
in your training that it was going better. You could see that that was going better. Yeah. And what I'm finding is a lot of the time, like executing on race day and having your absolute best legs and having the best day ever that you're hoping to have, that's one of the hardest things to do. Because even then, like, because a lot of people I work with and consult with is when we talk about the feedback cycle of figuring out if something's working or not,
Like, I take every chance I get to, like, give somebody a taper and a race, even if it's, like, not time to taper and race properly. I just want to kind of get a sense of what works. You know, we'll taper into, like, you know, like an FTP test or something like that, or like a minor race, like a B race, and just see how it works and have that be, like, maybe, you know, six, eight, ten weeks ahead of an A race.
And that's a really good way to kind of test things out. And if you are only ever like racing once a year or something like that, you're only ever really tapering once a year, suddenly you don't have nearly as much data. And that's one of those process things that's happened over the years that I think that I've
Ben extremely conscious of, especially, you know, late 2016, just pushing FTP work all the time, not seeing FTP go up, holy shit, what's going on? And it, always questioning that kind of stuff, and, you know, what could possibly be, like, what's going on with the training, also what's going on off the bike, and appreciating how much impact that life stress has on fitness and stuff like that.
That kind of stuff, you know, that really did take me years to learn. And every year I learn at least one lesson like that where I'm like, wow, I wish I had known this years ago. And I don't think it's ever going to stop either. Yeah, yeah, no, I hear you. Let's see. Do we have any other thoughts before we get into listener questions? Because I think for the list of stuff that I had, I was kind of...
That's kind of it. I think we've covered a lot of this so far. No, I think that's good. I mean, I think a lot of people like to present themselves as experts and never reveal, you know, oh, I'm just this expert. I've always been an expert, of course. It's always been hunky-dory. It's great, you know. And even, you know, a similar thing. Like, I've done it before where I've been like, oh, let me go look at something I wrote.
Some lab report or something I wrote in college, or even early grad school, or even my thesis is not good, and you're just like, oh, it's so bad, it's so bad. And obviously, you as an individual, you're always going to be a lot more hard on yourself, sort of just mentally, at least I am, certainly. But, yeah, it's hard not to look back at some of these things and be like, wow, I have come a long way. And that is also kind of nice, I think.
Having that insight into, you know, I have gotten better and, you know, it has been a journey, but a productive journey. Yeah. Yeah. And I think always looking for something to learn is, because I tell my clients all the time, especially the pros, is that, like, even though you're at this level,
There's always something to do better. And if you come out of a bad day on the bike or a bad race, and the only way it's actually bad is if you don't take anything away from it to do better next time. Even if you win, you might think, oh, wow, I kicked ass and this is great. I won, everything went right. Not necessarily. I still want to see, okay, what can we do better next time? Because, you know.
Whoever came in second place or third place or whatever, like that's what they're scheming about. And you've got to stay ahead. So, all right, listener questions, shall we? Yeah, let's do it. All right. Somebody says, in before more rest plus more carbs equals more better. Nailed it. Yeah.
Any specific events that shifted your paradigm or coaching philosophy since 2015? Yeah, things not turning out how I expected them to turn out. That's the biggest one. Think, what are your goals? What should improve here? And is it happening? If not, go back to the drawing board. And you may not have to scrap your entire plan, but you may have to change a couple things. And whether it's little tweaks or if it's big philosophy, is it happening off the bike?
There's a lot of factors in here. Never be afraid to adjust or change in real time. Yes. Yeah. How much has changing science changed your training methodology since 2015? That's a good one. Not much. Because one of the things about the
the quote unquote science that's coming out is that, well, Kyle, you and I talked about this before we hit record is like, you know, we're not looking for a study most of the time. Yes. Sometimes there is a study where it's like, wow, but even a study is built on other studies. Like the structure of DNA was built on Rosalind Franklin's like x-ray crystallography. Like she was doing a lot of work and she had published a bunch of stuff and, you know.
It's one of those things where there was foundations laid for this one study. So it's a preponderance of evidence, but like a lot of the stuff that people are thinking about now, we've known since the 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, like for a while. Yeah. I mean, and like you said, like, really, it's...
And a classic example of the science, right, is that what, every four or five years, someone tells you not to eat egg yolks, that, oh, this study says, oh, no, no, egg yolks are bad for you. Oh, no, no, just kidding, egg yolks are fine. Oh, no, no, they're bad for you again. You're like, no, it's not that this one new study came out and it outweighs all the other previous studies on egg yolks or whatever it is. It's the whole body of literature together, like, especially given how hard things can be to measure.
in biology and physiology, biochemistry, things like that. Rarely is one study going to come through with so much weight behind it that it like, you know, oh, by the way, DNA doesn't exist. Like what? Like how much, like what kind of study would you need to like overturn the theory of gravity? Like GMM over R squared, like what would you need for that? I mean, I don't think it would be, at this point,
Given how successful Newton's laws and Kepler's laws, which build on Newton and all this stuff, are, like, I don't think it would be possible. Like, you couldn't, you could not come up with so many different phenomenon because gravity, just even GMM over R-squared, has been proven to be true so much at, like, a ton of different length scales. Like, it's true on tabletop experiments to try to measure gravity. It's true when you look at planes flying.
When you look at Earth and the Moon, the Earth and the Sun, the planets in the solar system, the galaxy, like, and all the stars rotating around the galaxy, how other galaxies interact, like, all that stuff. Galaxy-bending light. Yeah, like, so all these things. And it's not like, oh, sure, you can find specific phenomenon here and there, and yes, dark matter, blah, blah, blah. But generally speaking, if something is true in all of these different cases,
It's gonna be basically impossible, right? It's like if somehow they proved that, oh, oxygen binds as O2 here on Earth, but, you know, in a far distant, very strange...
Weird Place. Oxygen doesn't form a molecule with itself. It just floats around, you know, naturally occurring. It's like an O minus. Oh, God. Yeah, it's an O minus. No, or it's an O zero. It's just somehow it can make an O zero all the time and it's happy. You know, like how? You've like, we're pretty sure we know how electron orbitals work and how the bonding works and all this stuff. Like, how could you just all of a sudden have this one special case where O zero just exists on its own? Well, I think that's one of the things about,
Well, to bring this back to relevance, although not that I don't appreciate that thought, but in physics, there's an answer to an equation. In exercise physiology, if you look at most papers and you go, like, because I've been reading a lot of textbooks and I think, okay, what, okay, this paper's, this author says, this paper says this.
and if I think that's worth going to check and I'd say like half the time I do which is why it takes me forever to read anything is I'm always checking the references and I go back and I think okay how do they measure this that and the other thing and also I think the science I mean this is kind of what I was getting at with measurement errors like a lot you'll see a lot of people say like what does the science say like you're talking about with eggs and like oh the science says this but
You can read into the science, and it's like, okay, well, this paper disagrees with this science, so this science disagrees with science. Yeah, I think presenting science is this, like, monolith of, like, oh, it all says this one thing, and all of science is captured by this one paper, or, like, oh, this new paper came out, so it changes the science is a
Poor interpretation of how the scientific method works. Yeah. But I think that's one of the things that I see is common these days. A lot of people will be familiar with a couple things, like they're familiar with some dynamics of lactate. They're familiar with some things that VO2max, and they'll develop training aphorisms that kind of work for them.
And then when they take it to logical extremes, it gets really weird. Like if you think that AMPK activation is the only thing that drives mitochondrial biogenesis, you're going to absolutely fuck yourself with intensity because that means you've got to basically, okay, what activates AMPK? Low glycogen. How do we activate low glycogen? How do we get there? Oh, we got to do a lot of high intensity training. So every single day becomes like riding within an inch of your life. And then are you going to be able to recover from that? Fasted endurance rides, right? Low glycogen.
Oh my god, I know, and it's Fasted 30-30s, next level Oh dear god So anyway, moving on, so let's do some shorter answers, we got a little carried away with that one At what point did you earn enough trust to build your clientele? Starting the podcast But I think even before the podcast, putting out the FTP testing article was
I think it was the first time people knew my name. Because I remember in the WKO4 group, I remember Tim Cusick, I think he took a liking to me. He once was like, hey, anybody who wants to write an article for us? And I was like, oh, I need some exposure as a coach. Like, sure, I'll write an article. And he wrote, dude, I'm so glad you reached out. I was hoping you would. And I was like, wow, cool. And it was like stuff like that where I was like, maybe I've got something to contribute.
Writing an article, I don't think is the same as listening to a podcast. And I think this is why people like Joe Rogan so much, for whatever reason, is they can hear him and you kind of feel like you've talked to this guy for a couple hours. And I feel like people feel like they've talked to me for a couple hours. And it leads to familiarization. And when people reach out for coaching and we chat, it's like, and I'm getting to know somebody else.
Now we are, it's like, it's like there's a head start on having a relationship. Yeah. There's familiarity. I think the other thing there too is just having that shared dictionary or shared thesaurus of like what terms mean and things like that help a lot. Whereas, you know, if you're trying to break into the science or figure out some of this stuff, just not knowing, you know, if you talk to a coach and they call
VO2 Max Intervals, some like proprietary name, like, well, what the hell is that, you know? Yeah, yeah, VO2 Max being proprietary, of course. Well, and actually, I've had people be like, oh, when are we going to do this, that, and the other thing that I've heard about that's so famous? And I'm like, probably never. They're like, wait, we're not going to get to do that? It's like, well, maybe, we'll see. Depends on your goals, depends on how things are going. And then they see the process of...
like the individualization and that kind of stuff. And they give me feedback. And I think, and I'm good enough at saying, I like to think that, oh, I didn't get that quite right. Let's do it better next time. Let's change this for next week. And people know that at this point, I think they have to give me enough feedback. And that's another thing that I've harped on in the podcast enough is that I don't know how you're doing. I don't like flying blind. Apparently I was fine with it, you know, in 2015, but.
I really don't need more, and if somebody's not leaving feedback, it's like, please tell me how you're doing. Anyway, so what gave you results, even though you'd never recommend it to anyone? I think we just talked about that.
Yes. The training schedule I gave to client one from 2015 got results and then it stopped getting results. So I don't recommend doing that. I recommend always looking for results. How do you differentiate if it's a good training plan or just a genetically good athlete who would respond to anything? Having now worked with several...
Freaks of Freaks, let's put it, like somebody like Corey. Corey said, I'm an open book, you can look at whatever, so let's talk about Corey. So looking at Corey's old training plans and with his previous coaches, I don't need to name them, pretty much everybody who's familiar knows who they are. A lot of it was some of the worst and dumbest training I've ever seen.
and with the worst philosophy behind it. Like, oh, you're suffering with this? Okay, well, you've got to ride harder now, which led to very rough burnout and fatigue and et cetera, et cetera. So it's certainly possible to fuck it up, even with somebody who's naturally that good. And one of the things that I've noticed is that
Because I used to think that people who are that naturally talented would respond to anything, and they will respond to some degree. But it's like when, you know, you get somebody way past where they've been before with not stupid training, or what I consider not stupid training anyway, even though in maybe 10 years I'll think it is, then you can think, okay, wow, they really don't respond the same to everything.
and it's certainly possible to fuck up and just nailing the basics. Nailing the basics is so key to everything and not big braining anything and just thinking I need to do endurance riding threshold VO2 max and some race specific efforts and then whatever else there's you don't got to get fancy and just yeah so
So differentiating if you're working with somebody really good or not, like if you're working with somebody really good, you're pretty much going to see the right improvements all the time, no matter what, you've still got to follow basic training principles, you can fuck it up, and if you think you're working with somebody who's really, really that good, and they're not improving, it's time to take a good hard look at what you're doing.
Yeah, I can't imagine, especially if you're relatively new to coaching, and yeah, you happen to get people. And obviously, there are all sorts of genetic freaks out there who respond well to all sorts of training. I can't imagine. It does have to be kind of a mindfuck the first time you're just like, shit, that worked. It worked once. I didn't work again. Yeah, let's do more of the same. That'll work the second time, too.
And so somebody else asks, is it harder to learn optimal coaching practices when coaching freak athletes? And the answer is yes, but also no. So it depends, of course. Because if you're 70% or 80% of the way to the best training plan ever, not that there is any such thing, you're going to see a lot of good responses and you're going to see somebody have good legs and good race days and good training. And as long as it's consistent, it's fine.
And one of the things that I actually think about for myself is I never want to stop working with amateurs. Because honestly, like people who are like time crunched, people who just are in it for more fun and enjoyment and just want to have a couple good race days, they're not looking for, I want to have a hundred more watts of FTP by this time in the fall or something like that. Like that's...
It keeps you grounded, I think. So having a balance, if you're getting into coaching, I think having a balance of that works really well. Because I consulted with somebody who was coached by a very big name coach, I'm not going to name who. And this coach was giving this person the same training that they were giving their star athletes. And star athletes could do X, Y, Z, this person can't. And there was no...
Feedback Mechanism of what's going wrong here. Why can't this person execute the same way that the top level guys do and the top level women do? So what's wrong? There was never any question of what's wrong. It was like, well, we're just going to keep hammering this until either you get better or you burn out. And the answer was burnout. Surprise, surprise. Go figure. So yeah, it's totally possible to screw it up. But hopefully if you are
One of those people, or you are working with one of those people, just stick to the basics. Don't get too fancy. And yes, just be honest with yourself about what you're getting at the other side. Did you ever felt that you ruined a season of a client? Love your pod. Thank you. Not an entire season. But, because I don't think, maybe.
I think I've overtrained two people. And I didn't know that was what was happening at the time. And one of the things that I think is difficult about that is when somebody comes in thinking I know everything, they trust the plan too much. And they don't give you the feedback of this isn't working or I'm tired. Because they think that you know what's going on with them and that this is part of the plan. And it's not.
No one is perfect. You can't think everyone is perfect. Anyone is perfect. And like we said, never be afraid to make an audible. Change things in real time. Yeah, definitely. And that's one of the things I've cautioned our assistant coaches, too. And somebody's like, I've heard so much about you. You're doing such great work with XYZ. Or I've been a fan of yours for a while. Like, I want you to teach me everything you know. I tell them, like...
Make sure this person gives you good feedback, because they might think that, you know, you're big braining the shit out of this, and it's, that the plan is flawless, and even if they're really tired, like, you know what you're doing, it's okay. But no, we need to hear that you're tired, we need to hear that you're sick, we need to hear that you're injured. Yeah. Question, what were the low-hanging fruit to make your initial training plans better and like today? Talking to people. Getting good feedback.
and Listening to People. That is the number one thing. Number two thing is the data feedback loop. Am I seeing in the metrics or in the training or whatever something that shows the improvements I'm expecting? If yes, good. Can we get a little more or are we topping out? If no, what's going wrong? And I always start with off-bike factors, stress, food, sleep, et cetera, et cetera.
And then we move on to, what am I fucking up in the training? Once we roll all those out. Let's see. What elements of current training plans will you most likely roast in 2030? I think if I knew that now, I wouldn't be doing it.
Whatever it is. Yeah, that's hard. That's being like, can you predict the future or something? I don't know. That's a weird one. Maybe there is something to these ketones. Drink them at the end of work. Question. Much of new advice is cyclical. That's debatable.
What from 2015 has gone out of vogue, but will soon be the it, like Zone 2? I don't know what big training trends there were in 2015, because the training media wasn't as big then. But I think one of the things that I believed, and a lot of people believed at the time, was that the training zone determined all. So if you do like a minute in Zone 5, okay, sure, now you've got to do, now you're going to have some VO2Max improvements, because you spend a minute in the VO2Max zone.
And I remember the first time I got an interval like that, it was like one to two minutes at like five minute power and then a couple minutes at like tempo power. And it was like, the interval was like 12 minutes long and I finished it breathing through my nose. And I was like, hey coach, I don't know if this is actually going to improve my VO2 max. And he was like, well, you spent, you know, 10 minutes in the zone for this interval. Like that was pretty good. In the zone.
20 or 30 minutes today. That's, yeah, we're going to see some improvements. And I was like, well, I remember doing VO2max intervals last year, and it was like five minutes, and I remember them being pretty hard, and this didn't seem to match my experience. Like, are you sure? And then as we worked together, which was only a handful of months, but my FTP was dropping, basically.
and I was like, hey dude, I don't think any of this is working and he was like, yeah, sorry, I don't know if, I don't know why we couldn't figure it out and I'm like, well, looking back on it, he wasn't really listening to my feedback and adjusting things because when you are, you know, when you're training an amateur athlete and they're saying, I don't think XYZ is working and you've got your own ideas about what is working,
Some people are not as receptive to hearing what they feel isn't working. And whenever somebody says that to me, I don't feel this is working, I panic. I'm like, oh God, like, let's figure this out right now. And I'll spend an inordinate amount of time thinking about that kind of stuff. So I think that's, what was the question? Oh, so what will be the new it? So I think, yeah, so I think the time and zone thing was the 2015 thing. I'm not entirely sure.
Yeah, because certainly for power meters, a lot of new tech was coming out then, and making them, you know, moving past the power tap hubs being your standard, you know, amateur power meter, a lot of quarks, and that was around the time when stages first started coming out, so yeah, I think a lot of the power zone stuff was becoming really popular because it was all of a sudden so much more accessible. Yeah.
But also, I don't think that the, you know, I think once WKO4 came out and Tim Cusick started doing the WKO4 webinars, I think that honestly started to change the landscape a lot. Because Tim was working from a very different place. Because I remember Andy, like coming up with the training levels, as he calls them, I guess as they're supposed to be called, they were supposed to be descriptive. Like you knew what kind of workout you were going to go out and do.
and you knew about where the power was going to come out and so you would go, okay, what did I do? I did this and that's about what the power thing was for. And I think that that's, it kind of screwed people because suddenly, you know, casual folks, like I definitely was, you know, in 20, when I started training 2010, 11, we all had the same ideas. We had the same dumb ideas.
Question, what has proven to be perennially good? The basics. Yeah, it always sucks to say that, but you're like, you just, you know, it's a pretty straightforward a lot of times. Well, it's like the more science comes out, let's say, a lot of it actually
A lot of the stuff that I read, and here's the thing about the media that I consume, is it's not really training media. I don't really listen to training podcasts. I'll skim a training article and I'll read it in depth if I think there's something potentially really interesting in it. And sometimes there is, for sure. But most of what I read is not cycling-related, specifically. Most of what I read is textbooks.
like papers and not from exercise physiologists. We're talking like biochemists, gene expression stuff. And a lot of what's in there, if you kind of forget about all the training media, a lot of what's in there is disproving a lot of stuff that people think says should work and how it works. And so here's the thing is if I knew what the next big trend was going to be, I would start shitting on it right now.
just to get ahead of the curve. Because what's effective is not fun. It's not sexy. It doesn't grab headlines. It's like there's no – and one of the other things I've learned is that there's no one thing to do that's going to be the key to improvements in whatever. It's like –
If you just do Zone 2 training now, that should be the improvements to XYZ. And it's not. Like, you've still got to do endurance riding, you've got to do threshold, you've got to do VO2max, you've got to do race-specific efforts. If you sprint a lot, you've got to do some sprint stuff. Or maybe you don't need it, who knows? All right, next question. If you are trying to start coaching right now, what are the three things you want yourself to know? I actually get a, you know, every couple months somebody will reach out and say, like, I'm going to start coaching, what should I do?
My first piece of advice is to find a friend to coach who's not afraid to give you shit. It's probably the best thing you can do. Because if somebody is not afraid to say, hey, this is stupid, or I think this isn't working, and you've got to justify yourself, and then you've got to see if it works or not. And both you and your client have to be honest about it. And so that also goes to communication, being able to talk to somebody and see how they're doing, see what's going on.
So those are two things. And the third thing is don't get fancy. Big brain time. Huh? It's big brain time. Yeah. No, really. And I've had plenty of big brain moments myself. And it turns out my brain is not that big. And it's one of those things where...
If you feel like you know a lot of the science, and I feel like I know a lot more science than most coaches, and certainly not as much as some, but there's very little that you are going to be able to put together where you go, oh, this is how it works, and this is why it works. Because every time I think I've got something like that,
I really dig deep into it and then I go, oh, I am totally wrong about this and I have upended everything I thought I knew was right. And so, and I don't know, because I think having done a lot of biochem and knowing metabolism as intimately as I do, honestly, like in 2015, I thought that was going to be the key to being a great coach. And all it's helped me do is debunk a lot of
Training FADs in my own head and see, okay, this shouldn't work. This is why this might work. Maybe we should try this. Maybe there's this modification. And a lot of the time, it's just like we just scrap it. It's not even worth doing. And that's really what I think a lot of the science, quote unquote, says to me is don't get fancy. There's a lot more than you could possibly know. And somebody even who knows everything would tell you.
We really, this is a super complex system, there's not a lot we know. And no one knows everything, so. What have your associate coaches taught you over the years? Oh God, a lot. I mean, we have meetings every month where we talk to each other and figure stuff out, but one of the things that I always try to do when I'm
Finding a New Assistant Coach for Us is I think about somebody who's receptive to criticism from each other, but also from clients. So somebody who's not egotistical enough to think that they've got everything figured out. I think we've got a really good group of people for that. Somebody who's empathetic and has gone through some shit themselves.
sometimes helps, or somebody who's been a former client of ours, like our new coach Rory, worked with Fabiano, and he had a good experience, now he's a great coach himself. But yeah, it's, so everybody's got a different skill set, and everybody come through like, okay, I've had this success this month, or I'm having this trouble, and we all talk through it. And so it's,
There's not one big thing I can really think of, but it's been a long process of just really, really good discussions and feedback. Okay, last question. What was the best paper you read to date, or top five and why? Well, we kind of talked about this when we over-answered the first question, but I think I can say a couple papers always stand out in my mind. There's a paper from, well,
Determinants of, what do you call it? God, what was the title of that? I refer to it all the time and I never remember the title. Determinants of Performance in Endurance Athletes or something like that. The Coil and Coggin one we've looked at like three times on the podcast already. We will look at it in an upcoming episode too for a fourth time because it's got a good open data set, but it looked at so many things and it goes through so much.
Interesting factors. I wish they had had more data on the backgrounds of these, the participants, but that's okay. It's one of the, a well put together study, well controlled for, and what else? There's one by, I think, Montero. I think the title is like, Hematological Improvements.
you know are the driving factor something like this of improvements in newly trained endurance athletes or something like that and he looks at so many interesting factors and so many and he tested so many things and when basically that's one of the things that happens is that has helped inform my understanding of physiology and training
is when you stop training, your plasma volume goes down, and that leads to a drop in VO2max. And I think this is actually in the determinants paper as well, is when they re-infused plasma volume and saw VO2max go back up for the most part. So that was really helpful to see. Oh God, what else? Oh, there's a VO2max paper.
It's like looking under the street lamp on VO2max, like what do we know, what do we need to know, and it kind of breaks down the Fick equation and has some really good diagrams and stuff like that. That's a great paper. I forget who wrote that. My apologies. Coggin is so good with remembering authors and stuff like that. I am shit. It's one of those academic things. Academics just love to have this encyclopedic knowledge of, oh yeah, and that one paper from 94 where
What's-His-Face, did the X, Y, and Z, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Kyle, what have been your favorite papers that we've looked at on the podcast so far? Oh, the one, oh, the skier's paper. Yeah, the skier's one. Looking at enzyme activities in slow and fast-twitch fiber types. That was like the first one I thought of. Yeah. I like that one. That's a great one. Yeah. Yeah, the COIL one is Physiological Determinance of Endurance Exercise Performance.
There it is. Is that what it is? I know it's like, it's got a couple big words in the title. Yeah. Me no words good. And I think other than that, the new book that just came out is a great one, edited by, I think, Glenn McConnell. It's like an exercise physiology textbook. I'm a little more than halfway through it.
Phenomenal Book, Great Review of Everything. And there's a bunch of stuff in there that I'm like, wow, I've got a lot of little bookmarks. I've got some highlights. I've got some things. And I'm like, I got to go back and read more into this later. But that's also one of the things that we kind of talked about earlier is that there's usually no one paper that is...
going to tell you everything. It's a preponderance of evidence and it's building a larger framework of understanding more than any single paper will ever do, really. I think the other thing, too, is it's not like all of those old workouts that people did from lore or whatever did not have some, always the effective ones, it's not like they didn't have any science behind them and so you have to use
quote unquote science to figure out all of the good ones and you know it's not like you're starting from scratch right like you can extract those like we said with like myths and things like that there's usually some grain of truth in there so you can extract the good parts throw away the rest and so even without knowing a lot of like you think back to a lot of like say you know there's a lot of you know sports science sports training
The papers have been around 50s, 40s, 50s, 60s. A lot of those times, they couldn't do the measurements we can do today. But because they had, you know, other methods of, like, figuring out if performance is going up, like, you don't just need to be hooked up to a gas exchange cart, right? You can look at times, race results, things like that. There are other ways you can figure out, oh, this block of training was better than that one, you know? And if you're, especially for, you know, it...
For good, for bad, you have these old Soviet sports studies. It's not like they were just completely flying blind, like picking random workouts and guessing, right? No, that's – yeah. Well, and that's one of the things that I think we talked about in Wattstock – what was it, 36? I think the title was like something about power meters making lactate testing obsolete because one of the things that has been –
True About Exercise Physiology for a long time was using it to describe performance. And then when we big brain it, we go, okay, well, if we can improve this marker of performance, we should see better performances. And a lot of times that's true. However, I think a lot of what we've gotten into lately in training and cycling, and I'm certainly guilty of this myself a lot of the time, is
is over-weighting the metrics, the physiological metrics that we have to describe things. Because I used to think, man, I've got to save up my money and get like a gas exchange meter and I've got the lactate thing, I've gotten lots of finger pricks on myself and my ears and my fingers. And the more I did that, the more I was like, you know what, this is unnecessary. Like, if we can get it for free, sure, okay, let's go figure that out. Like, and every time that...
Like one of my clients has been like, okay, team wants me to go do lab testing. All right, cool. Let's see what happens. And then everything comes back. Oh, it's right where we thought it was. All right, cool. Great. So way to spend a day. Not a wasted day, but it's like thinking about the performance is really what we are trying to get at. And thinking about
Improving Markers of Performance. Like, one of the AMA questions from, I think, last weekend was, how do I improve my hematocrit without going to altitude? It's like, you are, you're not only like, you know, looking at the trees and missing the forest, but you're like, you're like, got a microscope on the bark. It's like, you are so focused on this one little thing, you know.
Like, why? Why? Just try to optimize your training as best you can. At some point, if you're doing like 10 hours a week, you're probably going to tap out. And then it's like, okay, change your training philosophy. Change your goals. Like, get as many good race days as you can instead of thinking, I need to get in 10 watts more FTP this year. And doing everything you can to do that when you could have some good races and hopefully some good results.
That's the kind of thing that I think is the practical thing that I've learned the most. The science is great, and it can sometimes help inform what we're doing, but we've got to remember that we're looking at good performances. And the physiology has always been there to describe the performances and not to be a target to reach for.
Pro Team signs somebody with the new world's newest, highest VO2max ever recorded. What happens? You're not that good. How many times has that happened with like cross-country skiers like blow a 98 or something like that and get a contract and like, oh, how come they're not really good in these races? Well, they haven't been doing endurance stuff. Great VO2max, but they're missing a lot of skills and blah, blah, blah. So I'm sorry, I've been rambling. Kyle, please give us some thoughts. It makes sense.
It's not like this is built upon like, oh, we just take what the physiologist says and we just do it, right? Like there's, it's a mixture. It's art and science, I don't know, I kind of hate that analogy, but you know, there's all of these things built in. It's not like you're only, just like you don't inform your scientific worldview off of one paper, you don't inform all of your coaching based on just one perspective. All right.
So any wrap-up thoughts to kind of, how was the roast? Did we savage my old plans appropriately enough? Yeah, and I think it's good just to, I think rarely do we actually on the podcast talk about what a training week, like the details of a particular training week or something like that. Like I know in past
There have been other episodes where you've talked about season planning and stuff like that with people, but I think it's good because a lot of people want to know, like, what does too much look like? You know, like, you can be like, oh, that's too much. But, like, what exact, like, specific details and examples like that I think are useful. I think sometimes, too, you don't realize it until you do write it all out. And so, like, you know, in the moment when you're programming that week, a week, two weeks, whatever, for those old training plans.
It's harder to see that it's too much without seeing it all together. We're like, oh, what did you do for a month? Like, well, shit, you had a month and you had 18, you know, higher intensity workouts. Like, how do you think that went? Yeah, and looking at people's workouts every day, that changed a lot. Like, thinking, oh, they can't do this workout to a high quality. They can't make this progression.
Like, this is all failing. Why? Oh, they're doing too much hard stuff. Okay, now, like, and then when people started saying, I'm really tired. Oh, okay. Oh, let's, let's, let's fix that. I remember, I remember when I was coaching MIT, like, one of the people I was training individually came up and said, I am so tired. Is it possible I could get some rest before nationals? I'm like, oh my God, yeah. Yeah, let's get you some rest and not a peep before that.
I was like, yeah, I wish you had said something earlier. And it's like, I didn't know I could. It's like, yeah, I'm not perfect at this. And that's when I realized, like, you've got to put that stuff up front. Like, hey, I'm not going to always get it right. You've got to talk to me and tell me when I get it wrong. Because I don't know everything. Like, it's like the same with openers. Like, I can give you an opener set, but if you're tired that day and you've got to do less, maybe take an easy spin instead. You know, don't...
Don't stick to the plan. I tell people, like, you can modify as you see fit, like, on the fly, and then we'll figure out maybe what was going right, what was going wrong, et cetera, et cetera. So that feedback process is so, so, so, so important. Yeah. All right. Yeah. All right. Half a million. Here's to the next half a million. Kyle and I were also debating actually getting drunk while recording this podcast, so maybe we'll do that for a million.
Have video for that one. No. Yeah, sounds like a fun time. So thank you everybody for 500,000, 510,000 now I think. Podcast listens over the years with a surprisingly high retention rate for a podcast. If somebody makes it through like five minutes, they pretty much listen to the whole thing. So thank you all for listening. Thank you all for the kind words and saying that it's helped you out. Thank you all for reaching out for coaching.
because that is kind of what we're all about. But if you don't want to be coached or you can't afford it or whatever, we're here for you on the podcast. So thanks for listening and thanks for the feedback. Thanks for following me on Instagram at Empirical Cycling. Thanks for all the donations to the podcast at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. And thank you all for...
Reaching out with just your questions. Just email me, empiricalcycling at gmail.com if you want to set up a coaching consultation. Just ask a question, give some feedback, whatever it is. Thank you, everybody. And we hope that the next 500,000 listens are as good as the first 500,000. And maybe we'll get to a million someday. Unless the meteor crashes into the earth. All right, that's a cheering on to end on. All right, thanks, everybody. See you.